trying to clarify workflows for USB token secure certificates (#62)
nextcloud/end_to_end_encryption_rfc: RFC.md

5. Client stores the private key in the keychain of the device.
6. The mnemonic is stored in the keychain of the device (ideally with spaces so it can be shown more readable).

> A client detecting a certificate that has not been issued by the server public key and that has no support for secure USB token or is not finding the certificate on such a valid USB secure token should disable end-to-end encryption.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A client detecting a certificate that has not been signed with the servers public key and that has no support for secure USB token or is not finding the certificate on such a valid USB secure token should disable end-to-end encryption.
```

maybe?

> In case certificate are stored on secure USB token and generated outside the Nextcloud server app, not falling back to less secure software stored certificate should not be permitted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case certificates are stored on secure USB token and generated outside the Nextcloud server app, falling back to less secure software stored certificate should not be permitted.
```

"not falling back should not permitted"?
meaning it should be permitted to fall back or it should be forbidden to fallback to less secure tokens?

   2. If no: Show a warning that initiating an encrypted share is not possible to the user.
5. Store the user certificate locally for next operations

If certificates are externally managed, the workflow will differ:

1. Check if a certificate for the specified user ID is already downloaded (Trust On First Use (TOFU))
   1. If a certificate is available, it is verified to still be valid.
      1. It is valid, it will be used.
      2. It is no longer valid, the client will continue at 2.
   2. If none is available, the client will continue at 2.
2. Query the user certificate by sending GET request to the `/ocs/v2.php/apps/end_to_end_encryption/api/v1/public-key` endpoint and sending a JSON encoded `users` parameter containing the specified UIDs
3. If the user has not yet set up E2E and thus no public key, it will not be possible to share with the user.
   A warning should then be shown.

> 4. Verify that the certificate is valid.

Reviewer 2: How is this done? Against which public key?

Author: usual validation rules for a x509 certificate (like what a browser would do)
(start valid date, end valid date, not self-signed, not revoked, signing certificates known and valid, ...)

Author: we generally are unable to do this for certificates generated by the Nextcloud embedded CA
to check if we could modify the behavior to always use standard certification validation code (again what a browser would check)

Reviewer 2: > signing certificates known and valid

I was concerned about this step. Checking that the x509 certificate is signed by the public key of the NC instance is easy. But who is signing the certificate in this case? A publicly known CA? When you say *"like what a browser would do"*, you mean having a big list of trusted CA, and validating the certificate against them?

Author: yes
to do that I needed to fetch intermediate CA certificates from the windows store and let them known to Qt SSL API for validation purposes
I highly doubt that is currently relevant for web end-to-end encryption. I would expect a dedicated development to be needed to fetch the certificate from an user store instead of from the Nextcloud server app

Reviewer: Maybe we should allow providing the root cert then on the server as a capability?

Reviewer 3: but then the root cert could be exchanged by malicious attacker/admin?

As a PKI approach for encryption is used, every certificate is issued by a central root authority.
By default, the Nextcloud server acts as a root authority and issues the certificates from the CSRs.

Alternatively, the certificates may be entirely managed by an external certificate authority (CA). In such cases, the workflow has to be different.

> The clients do the following when trying to establish a trust relationship to another user when certificates are generated directly by the end_to_end_encryption Nextcloud app:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The clients do the following when trying to establish a trust relationship to another user when certificates are generated directly by the `end_to_end_encryption` Nextcloud app:
```

   2. If no: Show a warning that initiating an encrypted share is not possible to the user.
5. Store the user certificate locally for next operations

If certificates are externally managed, the workflow will differ:

1. Check if a certificate for the specified user ID is already downloaded (Trust On First Use (TOFU))
   1. If a certificate is available, it is verified to still be valid.
      1. It is valid, it will be used.
      2. It is no longer valid, the client will continue at 2.
   2. If none is available, the client will continue at 2.

> 2. Query the user certificate by sending GET request to the `/ocs/v2.php/apps/end_to_end_encryption/api/v1/public-key` endpoint and sending a JSON encoded `users` parameter containing the specified UIDs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Query the user certificate by sending GET request to the `/ocs/v2.php/apps/end_to_end_encryption/api/v2/public-key` endpoint and sending a JSON encoded `users` parameter containing the specified UIDs
```

> 3. If the user has not yet set up E2E and thus no public key, it will not be possible to share with the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. If the user has not yet set up E2EE and thus no public key, it will not be possible to share with the user.
```
